
Dissem.in: Metadata Harvesting for Open Access Policies
Antonin Delpeuch 
University of Cambridge 
École Normale Supérieure 
antonin@delpeuch.eu



Many institutions adopt open access policies, requiring researchers to make their articles freely
available in a repository. Enforcing these policies is far from straightforward however: according to
a recent study in the UK ,
each article costs an estimated 33 GBP of staff time to ensure compliance with the RCUK policy.
Researchers often consider these policies as a burden: they need to
understand the requirements of their publishers and their institutions,
and to spend time uploading their articles to various repositories, with
the appropriate metadata.

We propose to lower these barriers with dissem.in, a
system that leverages various metadata sources to get a clear picture
of the access status of publications.
The platform allows researchers and librarians to search for papers
filtered by two criteria: full text availability in open repositories
and publisher preprint policy. This enables us to compute a list of papers
that are not available in repositories yet, but that could safely be uploaded
to repositories given the preprint policy of the publisher.
We expect such a tool to be very useful when enforcing open access policies, especially when 
there is no designated repository where researchers have to upload their works.

The web platform is a free software still under development, and is being tested at École Normale
Supérieure, a french university, to implement an open access policy. A proof of concept is running
at http://ens.dissem.in/ and encompasses a few departments in this university.
 
Each researcher in a given university

 the publications
list of researchers affiliated to a given university. The tool helps
researchers to upload their papers and universities to measure the
availability of their research output in open repositories. The key
feature is that the system is not a repository itself and is not tied to
any particular repository, but is more a form of search engine.

Overview of the system

Our web platform allows to browse the publications of researchers within
a university. These publications can be filtered using two criteria:
publisher policy and full text availability.












These two criteria can be visually combined to help researchers grasp
instantly the status of their publications, as in the following example:












Demo

A prototype is running and encompasses some departments of the École
Normale Supérieure (ENS), a french university where an open access policy
is being elaborated. It is online here:
http://ens.dissem.in/

Technical details

Metadata sources

We use the OAI-PMH  protocol to crawl repositories, covering more
than 8 millions of papers. An additional coverage is provided by the Bielefeld
Academic Search Engine  and CrossRef.org.

Author disambiguation

We perform automatic author name disambiguation to get accurate
publications list for each researcher. The problem can be formulated as
follows: given a list of researchers for each department in a
university, and given a list of millions of papers fetched from various
sources, find the papers corresponding to our known researchers. Our
approach is a two-stage machine learning algorithm, similar to the AuthorMagic heuristics
used in the Invenio platform .

plain




